---
layout: chapter
title: "Chapter 1"
world: iolinus
book: the-nalan-apostasy
order: 1
---

She opened her eyes on a strange world. She couldn't explain exactly what was wrong, what was different about this world around her. The ceiling above her caught her attention first. It was an open ceiling, open beams to the slanted roof. Those beams were hewn, not machined. Some realtor would probably advertise this as rustic. She found that she could move her head and she rolled it in the direction of the brightest light, the open, unshuttered window. The sky was a brilliant blue with a few patchy cirrus clouds high in the air. The rest of the room was equally rustic. All of the furniture appeared to be well-made but with that intentionally unfinished look. She decided that she didn't like the look here any more than back on Earth.

The door opened and a young man in what appeared to be a tunic draped over a linen undershirt. "Good morning," he said brightly. "What is your name?"

"Boadicea," she answered automatically before she remembered she hated that name. "But I go by Gabby."

"A pleasure to meet you, Gabby. Welcome to Iolinus. My name is A.J."

A.J. set the tray on the table beside the bed. It was a bowl of what appeared to be broth and a cup of water.

"I was about to check your pulse, but you're here now, so it seems superfluous," he said with a smile. "I can grab something more solid for you if you feel like it."

"You don't seem surprised at my sudden recovery, so I'm assuming that you know what's going on?"

The grin widened and A.J. pulled the neck of his tunic aside. Gabby gasped at the sight of a very lifelike, gray-colored rose tattooed on his shin. Reflexively, she pulled the neckline of her own sleeping gown revealing a similar tattoo on her own chest.

Golly, it wasn't a tattoo. She poked at the rose once and snatched her hand away. It wasn't an image on her skin—there was something, an actual rose embedded in her flesh.

"Quite the Vulcan mind meld, isn't it?" A.J. laughed. "I can still remember my first time seeing that when I woke up here, myself." "You're from Earth too?" Gabby asked in wonder.

"Muskogee, Oklahoma, US. And you?" "Manchester, New Hampshire!" she replied. "Are there more of us?"

"A few," A.J. shrugged. "Not that many, to be honest. I think Nala can't sneak that many past Zeta without being noticed."

"Zetahat?"

"Yeah, sorry. It's one of the slang names we use for Zeta. It's kind of a play on asshat."

Gabby chuckled. "Any more of those?" "Oh, plenty, but we'll get you using them later. To answer your question, there's only one more of us here right now. Her name is Daochen."

"From the US, as well?"

"Nope. Daochen is from Xi'an, China, though you'd never know it from her host."

"What do I look like?" Gabby wondered.

"I'll get you a mirror if you want one. But you got red hair and slate gray eyes, almost blue. Of course, you have freckles, what we might call a 'peaches and cream' complexion. In this world, Laila was a member of the Margriet culture."

His voice turned serious.

"I wouldn't recommend thinking overly long about how you used to look back on Earth. That will drive you loco if you let it get in your head. Most of us, the ones that I've met, don't mention it. It doesn't help to remember."

"I see," Gabby bit on her lower lip as she processed. It was wisdom.

"You don't have to tell anybody about what you left behind," A.J. assured her. "Normies here wouldn't know what you would be talking about and we try to keep under Zeta's radar when we can. But if you need to talk, we'll listen. We know what you're going through." "Thank you!" Gabby said after a moment of silence. She wanted to change the subject and pointed at the rose under her skin. "What's this?"

A.J.'s eyes lit with enthusiasm as he finally sat at the end of the bed Gabby lay in. "That is the coolest thing ever!" he bubbled. "It's what makes you and me possible. It's called a Greyrose."
