---
layout: chapter
title: "Chapter 3 — Gabby"
world: iolanu
book: the-nalan-apostasy
order: 3
---

Gabby stood at the window of the third story passage way of the oldest building on the grounds of the University of Ibelin.  The Apostasy called this the chapterhouse proper, but the rest of the university knew it as *Camulos Hall*.  It had started out as an inn, built by the original Camulos before the Shattering.  It had been the first building of what would become the university and today it was housing and commons for staff.

None of which meant anything beside Gabby trying to distract herself from the chaos of the last three days in this new world.  She tended to drift to trivia when she felt disconnected or a bit of loss.  It was soemthing of her own defense mechanism.

Laila's letter from yesterday had been troubling, but more in its mundanity than in any real earth-shattering revelations.  She had been a Caelori woman from a large family from near Glannoch.  She had pointed out the strands of her Lifesong that had been tattooed across her chest.  

Gabby raised her hand to cover her heart.  Laila had called her lifesong in the Key of Rememberance, Ta'Eirnath.  Her family had seen the wisdom in their growing daughter's eyes and had tattooed guidance over Laila's heart.  And that daughter had sacrificed herself to let Gabby come into this world.

And that was the problem that Gabby was experiencing right now.  Not only did she feel rather ghoulish, occupying a body that wasn't really hers, but also that the beautiful Ta'Eirnath soul had agreed to cut her own life short for a complete stranger.  Laila's faith in Nala had been so complete, so absolute.

Gabby didn't know if she could be worthy of that sacrifice.  

"No pressure, Gabs."  She muttered to herself as she looked at the sunny day outside of the window.  "No pressure at all."

"Are you well, Gabby?"  A warm, measured voice startled Gabby, but she had come to recognize Daochen before she turned to face the older Chinese soul in a Takomai body.

"Honestly?"  Gabby asked and turned her attention outside again.

"Always", Daochen said calmly but with an undertone of iron.

"I don't know, Mother.  I truly don't know."

Daochen raised an eyebrow over the honorific.  

"Mother?"  She said worriedly.  "I take it you need my advice