---
layout: chapter
title: "Chapter 1"
world: iolanu
book: by-chance
order: 1
---

To the reader of this book, I wish to express my sincerest apologies.  If you are reading this, then we have failed.  I can't even imagine the horrors unleashed by our failure, which, for a man whose entire job is theoretically imaginary, takes some doing.  I write this hoping that you would not have to read this.  If we succeed, there will be an eternal peace.  You and yours will have no further cause for worry or fear.  

My name is Chance Hodgkins.  I am a quantumancer.  I have the ability to make the unlikely real by simply choosing which fate to assert.  The explanations are far too long and in-depth for an introduction, so I'll condense it.  A quantumancer has the questionable gift of being able to see all outcomes regardless of how likely or unlikely.  I mean every outcome, even something as mundane as breathing creates a haze.   After a while, a quantumancer gets lost in the buzz and can't find the prime reality, the one you inhabit.  I can make literally anything happen.

I am, quite literally, the most powerful being that has ever lived and ever will.  And I am utterly mad.  Highly functional but insane nonetheless. 

This book is a project that my reader, Alyzandra, suggested I write.  Her job is to keep me sane.  She might have succeeded if she hadn't been gone for over 1,500 years now.

A reader is someone who can see the possibilities that a quantumancer can but can't exert their will to manifest an alternate outcome.  This lets them remain fixed in the prime but understand how the quantumancer sees things.  Very simply, they “read” the possibilities without getting lost in them.  Thanks to this ability, readers can be effective tools to anchor quantumancers like me to the Prime or bring us back down when we've gone batty.

This book is Alyz's way of bringing me back from madness.  She wants me to explore my past and record it.  I think she wants to use this as a way to remind me of my humanity.  To make it worse, she insists that this be written in the first-person style, a style I absolutely detest.  I've been putting this off for over 1,500 years now.  And now, on the eve of our greatest feat, I feel the need to finally get this done.  I promised Alyz that I would do it and I can't leave this universe without completing it.

So let's get this over with,  you don't want to read this any more than I want to be writing this.  For both of our sakes, I'll make this brief, as brief as I can.  I've got a universe to destroy, after all.  

I forgot to mention that, didn't I?  What greater peace than to simply not exist.  

You're welcome.

I was born in a small village a few days south of where Oacoma now lies.  It was a seaside village, so we had all of the occupations that you would expect, sailors, net menders, and fishermen.  Dear Malachor below, the fishermen.  If there is anything I detest more than writing in first-person, it's fishermen.  

It's nothing personal, I've known some very fine fishermen.  My problem is that I almost became one.  My father owned quite a few boats and it was expected of me to carry on the trade.  After a few years as an apprentice, and a very personal tragedy, I decided that I was no fisherman. 

I don't know what happened to my family or even that little village.  I was away for almost two thousand years. I was busy, distracted by a newfound trick that I had discovered.  I could make my daydreams come to life.  I could see things and if I wanted it enough, it became true.

Alyz is telling me to slow down, that I'm glossing over critical parts that I need to record.  We've reached a compromise, when I'm narrating, I have to use the first-person.  But when I write the actual story, I can use the third person. 

Yes, I know Alyz is dead and I'm negotiating with a dead woman.  I'm insane, remember?  I thought we had already gone over this.  Try to keep up or this will take forever to write. 

****

Chance Hodgkins winced as he straightened from crouching over the netting in his hands.  Prior to the fishing season, the families that owned fishing vessels would drag out their gear to inspect and repair it.  The older children were tasked with mending the nets.  They typically gathered in the square so they could talk and socialize against the boredom of such a mindless task.

Chance, on the other hand, kept to himself at these times.  He welcomed the mindless net mending.  He could put his body in an automated mode while his mind was able to wander freely without being distracted by the constant nattering of others.  Chance looked forward to the yearly task.  He, by far, preferred repairing the nets to hauling them from the bay, laden with fish.  He would often get called upon for emergency repairs for nets from all the boats that might need the repairs.

It was a warm day.  The last of the winter snow clung stubbornly in the shade of the village longhouses.  Garden plots were starting to be plowed and planted and the sheep and llamas begged for someone to shear the winter fleece from their panting flanks.

"Hi, Chance!" 

Chance looked up and grinned at the brunette girl of about his age.  Rhyannin was his best friend, but recently she had become much more to him.  He didn't know if Rhyannin shared his growing attraction but he dared not pursue that attraction and risk a friendship that he valued more than anything. 

"Hey Rhy," he said and laid the net and the tools on the ground and stood.  His back popped loud as the bones in his spine realigned into their proper places.

"You shouldn't be sitting like that," she laughed and gave Chance a firm hug.  Hormones raged in his chest as Rhy's blossoming bosom was pressed against his chest.  He returned the hug as strongly.

Please don't react, he chanted in his head. Please don't react.

She let go and stepped away.  Chance felt a strange mix of longing and relief.  He sat in his chair again and quickly pulled the net over his lap.

Rhy sat on the ground with her back against the longhouse's wall.  Her brown hair shone in the sunlight and hung freely over her shoulders.  She typically wore it in a braid that she wrapped around her head to keep it from being caught on the fishing gear when she worked on her family's boat.

"I know," he said. "just the dirt." 

Rhy laughed.

"You picked the wrong life to hate getting dirty as much as you do." 

"I didn't get a choice,” Chance groused.

"Stop complaining Chance!” she admonished gently.  "You could have it for worse.  Malachor has been good to you." 

"I know," Chance replied, "I thank Malachor every day for his blessings." 

"Good," Rhy's face turned concerned and she looked about.  "You can talk freely with me, Chance.  But don't let Brother Micha hear you talking like this."

Chance nodded.  Brother Micha was the head priest in their village.  On the whole, he was a gentle soul.  However, any pretense to gentleness evaporated quickly when he thought the faith of Malachor was in question.  More than one wayward soul had found themselves "corrected" under Micha's stern guidance and the last thing that Chance wanted to do was to catch the cleric's attention.

An uncomfortable, and uncommon, silence hung between them.  Rhy seemed uncharacteristically at a loss for words.  Chance didn't trust his own words at the moment so he kept silent while she wanted her thought to what she wanted to say. 

"Are you free for the bonfire tonight?" She asked.

"I am,"  Chance replied,  "I wasn't planning on going."

"Please do”,  she said.  "I'll be waiting."  

Without another word, she sprang to her feet and quickly turned the corner of the longhouse and was lost from view.  What was that all about?  He picked up the net he had been working on and set his hands to automatic while his mind continued to wrestle with Rhy's invitation.

"Hey, Chance." 

Jym wasn't a friend, at least not one that Chance spoke to frequently.  They were about the same age.  However, Trym's father owned enough boats that he needed all the hands he could get.  He had given his smallest boat to Jym along with a small crew.  For all intents and purposes, Jym was a captain. 

He was also Rhyannin's big brother. 

"Hi Jym," Chance said and put his net on the ground.  "You just missed Rhy."

Jym smiled.  It seemed to chance that the other man knew something Chance didn't.

"Actually, I came to talk to you." 

"Need another net mended?" 

"Not right now," Jym said tapped a small chest that he carried under his arm.  "The boys and I picked this up yesterday when we were pulling up the catch.  It was floating not far from our net so I had one of them row out to pick it up." 

"What is it?" Chance asked.

"I don't know," Jym pulled the chest out and opened it up. The inside was mostly dry, which surprised Chance. The contents were curious. A small book with a black fabric bookmark lay on top of scattered bits of metal and loose papers.

Chance reached for the book. It was black, like the bookmark, but dyed leather.  It was small, barely larger than his hands. The pages were sturdy but the thickness of the book was due to the number of pages.  On the pages, there was a script that Chance wasn't familiar with. Some pages seemed to be lists of something while others were obviously longer-form narrative style "We were hoping that you would know none," gym said." We can read well enough, but that is mostly tallies And logs. You and brother Micha are the only two around here that really read."

"I don't know," Chance said. "this page might be a log entry," He held the book up. 

"Aye,” Jym said. "that short line would be a date or something.  See? Now we know more than we did when I first got here."

****

Yes, I know it was money in that box, don't be insulting.  At that time, the Thohalla didn't use money.  We bartered fish and labor for grain and fabrics, among other things, from the neighboring Thohallan villages around us.  We didn't need something as abstract as money.  

As for the book, yes, I eventually translated it, again don't be insulting.  It took a few millennia, which should tell you how difficult it is. Even then it took a key to crack it and that from a terrible event.

But, that is a story for a few chapters later.