---
layout: chapter
title: "Chapter 2"
world: iolanu
book: by-chance
order: 2
---

The bonfire was a semiregular, semiofficial rite of passage for Thohallan youth.  Actually, it would be more accurate to say it was an exclusive club open to village youth, no adults allowed.   The youngers would learn important social lessons from the older children while the older children learned to be mentors and role models.

Yes, I know the optics of leaving children to their own doesn't look good.  You're thinking of the trouble that unsupervised children can get into.  That's an arrogant, bigoted way of thinking.  You don't know what the Thohalla were like and the world in which we lived. 

Membership at the bonfire was strictly by invitation only. the older youth would reach out to a child when they felt the child was mature enough to attend.   Some were picked early, like me, and some were picked later, rarely a child would never receive an invite.  

There wasn't an absolute upper limit.  A youth would remain as long as they were unmarried and a virgin.  You would think that the "no adults" policy would encourage rampant promiscuity.  Quite the opposite, being a part of something special,  a secret society of a sort, was actually something that they valued enough to police each other and keep it in their pants.  

And, of course, they weren't completely unsupervised, we weren't complete idiots.  The adults had blinds and hides from which they could supervise.  The olders knew they were being watched, of course.  But, they knew that as long as they kept order, the adults were more than happy to keep in the background.

For myself, I found the events dull and tedious.  It wasn't a required event so after a few months as a younger, so I had decided that my evenings were better spent with my books.  If I could go back to those days and talk to me, I would have beaten that little brat until he got off his ass and onto the island with the other kids.  I was a prick.  Nothing has changed, I suppose.

****

He felt more than a little silly as he stood before the bonfire, hands extended for warmth.  Children, both younger and older stood by the fire.  The younger children seemed confused by his presence.  He never came to these and children were surprisingly adept at sensing inconsistencies.  The older also seemed to wonder at why he was here and what purpose his presence meant.

"You came!"  Rhy's voice pulled Chance's attention from the fire.  He turned and stopped.  

He felt his jaw drop as he caught sight of her.  Rhy was stunning.  She had always been beautiful, but now she took Chance's breath away.  Her hair was gathered in what looked to be a very intricate braid, though he couldn't be absolutely sure without looking at the back of her head.  She wore a pure white blouse with a leather bodice that had been dyed a deep red.  Chance felt his face flush as he noticed the bodice was doing some very interesting things to Rhy's breasts.  Around her waist was a wide leather belt with a silver buckle. Below that, a long woolen skirt was embroidered with ladyfinger and wintermist blossoms.

"Hi," Chance's voice cracked and he coughed uncomfortably. "Hi, Rhys.”

Rhyannin smiled and absently, nervously, played with the pleats of her skirt.  She seemed nervous and hesitant.  For a normally confident woman, it was out of character.

"Are you ok?" Chance asked. 

Rhy smiled. "Yes, come join me."  She motioned to one of the unoccupied logs set here for that purpose.

It was still early enough in the spring that evenings could still be cold and parents usually didn't allow the younger kids out after dark. with the constant shift of temperatures between day and night, the Thohalla believed such weather invited demons which caused colds and fevers.

"I know you love me, Chance," she said, skipping any preamble. Chance's blood froze.

"Of course I do!" he was playing for time to let his mind catch up. wherever he had thought that this conversation was going, this was a direction furthest away.

"No,"  she sounded annoyed. "I know that you're in love with me." 

Chance didn't respond.  He couldn't respond.  What had given him away?  He had fought hard to keep any trace of desire from his behavior towards Rhy. 

"I can see it in your eyes,” she said.  “For the briefest instance when you look at one, it's there.  The next second your wall goes up and it's gone."

Chance closed his eyes tightly and nodded.  I was the only response.  He felt nascent tears welling between his eyelids.

"You know it can never be, you and I, right?"

Again Chance nodded.  He knew she was destined for another man.  It was only a matter of time before she was out of his life forever.  He had wanted to make it not as tough to leave if she were ignorant of his love.

It was more than a tradition, it was a mandate directly from Malachor himself.  Each year, every village would send a young, unmarried woman to another village in exchange for one of theirs, if they had an equally young maiden.  By tradition, it was the youngest girl who had come into her womanhood.  That was typically a year after her monthly cycles began to give her some time to come to grips with the changes to her body.  The purpose of the exchange was to circulate the bloodlines among the Thohalla.  Stale bloodlines, who only married within their village gradually fell victim to the curses that Malachor had decreed for such inbreeding.

This year, it was Rhy.  After this fishing season, she would board a boat one last time and probably never see her home again.

"I didn't want to make things any more awkward than they were already are." His eyes were still closed. 

Rhy placed her hand on his face, cupping his cheek. 

"I love you too, Chance," she said quietly.  "I have for years."

Chance's heart stopped, figuratively, as he absorbed what she had said.  Then it shot skyward on wings of fire as she turned to him and dragged him in for a long, lingering kiss in the firelight.

"Nothing says that I have to be a virgin when I leave."  She smiled a devilish smile and winked.

****

Rhyannin was my first love.  In many ways, she was my only love.  

Yes, I've had other marriages with women that I was genuinely very, very fond of.  And, despite my reputation, I never cheated on any of them while they were alive.  The closest I ever came to loving another woman was Alyzandra.  Then again, as my Reader, she held a uniquely intimate place in my life.  She understood the demons that always tear at my mind.  She saw into my soul. 

But she never shared my soul like Rhyannin did.  Yes, Alyz knew this.  But, she knew that I was very, very fond of her.  That what I felt for her was the closest that I could get to love.

I won't go into details of what occurred that night.  The more insightful of those who read these pages will know and fill in the blanks.  I won't cheapen that night by writing some lewd details.  Those details are for my enjoyment only.  You go find your own first love for your own details.

Other perspicacious readers, (that means wise or observant to those readers from around Kitzigen Falls) will note the discrepancy between the actions of that night and my opening for this chapter.  Yes, what Rhy and I shared was uncommon, an intimate relationship outside of the bonds of matrimony.  Alyz feels as though I need to clarify that.

Personally, I don't feel as though it's any of the reader's business, but I have discovered that, most times, it's just better to do what a dead woman says.  Otherwise, she doesn't need to sleep and can nag me at all hours of the day or night until she gets her way.  I'd call it unfair but for the whole dying requirement.

As I said before, the Thohalla weren't prudes about sex.  Their attitudes were far more practical.  They were more concerned about having a bastard born to a mother that would be forced to raise on her own, or given to the village to raise.  The purpose of the disapproval was always meant to keep irresponsible pregnancies at a very bare minimum, reducing both the financial strain and emotional upheaval to an innocent child.

To anyone who has never lived in a small village, it's difficult to understand the concept of literally knowing everyone and everything about everyone.  The villagers knew about my emotions towards Rhy, and hers towards me, long before this conversation.  There was an expectation that, if Rhy stayed, we would have been married.  If it hadn't been for that tradition that I mentioned earlier, our families would have already been planning a wedding between us two.

But, everyone knew that it wasn't to be. In fact, the only way that both of us could have stayed together in that nameless little village was for her to become pregnant and for me to acknowledge my responsibility.  The problem with that is that the tradition demanded the trade.  If Rhy wasn't going, then the next youngest woman in the village, Theodran, would have been chosen.  

We thought about it, but we both decided that we couldn't do that to Theodran.  She was already engaged and any pregnancy on Rhy's part would have torn Theodran from the man she loved and had been planning on marrying for years.  So, during that time, we were very careful.

The next question is about how Rhy's future husband would feel about Rhy's lack of virginity.  Again, the Thohalla were concerned about the practicalities, not the morals of virginity.  A virgin bride was absolute proof that the husband wasn't inheriting more financial burden.  Otherwise, Thohalla men were happy to take on, shall we say, experienced wives.  Remember, one of Malachor's commands was that a fit man should never be outside of marriage, nor should a woman.  Multiple spouses, consecutive, not concurrent, were the norm as husbands or wives passed before their partner did.  The survivor would have been expected to remarry quickly and continue begetting children.