---
layout: chapter
title: "Chapter 3"
world: iolanu
book: by-chance
order: 3
---

That spring and summer were the best seasons of my life.  We would spend days working the nets on our family boats and the nights in each other's arms.  There were some rather crude jokes about the smell of fish.  Rhy had a sense of humor that could be as raunchy as I've ever met.

I'm going to rush over this next part.  You can't possibly understand how painful her loss was to me.  Sorry, Alyz, I just can't go into much detail here.

Things changed late in the summer.  The boats were out on one last fishing run when a storm appeared from the east.  One moment, a crewman yelled a storm on the horizon, and the next moment we barely had everything battened down when the blackest wall of storm clouds that I have ever seen screamed across the sea and almost capsized us.  The Sea of Storms earns its name honestly.

The gale battered our ship for three days.  None of us had anything left to throw up about eighteen hours after we were hit.  That should tell you something about a storm that can make men who grew up on the sea puke their guts out.  When it finally passed, the rigging was more broken rope than whole.  There were more splices from desperate repairs during the gale than would normally be forgivable.  We repaired what we could and limped back into our home harbor.

Most of the other boats had returned just as devastated as our own. I desperately searched for one special ship and grinned when I recognized Rhy's boat.  It had survived.

Rhyannin hadn't.  She had been washed overboard on the second day of the storm. My ego would love to tell you that I felt her passing.  That our souls were so entwined that the death of one would snap into the other.  Maybe at another time, I will embellish my story.  This time is about honesty.  And the truth.  To face where I came from and let it anchor me to the Prime.

Jym said that she had called my name just as she disappeared over the rail.  I would like to think it was the cathartic cry of a mind suddenly aware of oncoming death that they reach for a comforting last thought, like how many soldiers will cry out for their mothers as death takes them.  But another part of me wonders if she called out to me in a desperate plea for help.  Even to this day, I haven't decided.

I was inconsolable for weeks after that damned storm.  I wandered around in a daze for months.  My family wouldn't risk one in a dangerous place like a fishing boat with the state I was in.  I'd either hurt myself or cause another to be hurt because they were focusing on making sure that I was ok.  It was of dubious luck that the storm had caused so much damage.  That meant that I had more than enough damaged netting to keep me productive and out of any dangerous places.  

That was when Malachor decided to use me as an experiment.  I was in my normal place, absently mending a net when a burning, tearing flare of pain erupted in the center of my brain.  It wasn't a flash, it didn't fade.  It kept on and on, sometimes more sometimes less.  I began to see double as darkness began to close around me.  My mother called my name and the world went blissfully black. 

****

Chance groaned as he woke, His head still ached, painfully but not as horrifically as it had been.  What had happened? He didn't open his eyes. He could tell by the light through his eyelids that the sun was shining through a window. It promised more pain if he were to do something as foolish as opening his eyes right now.  What had happened? He perked his wandering thoughts back to the task that he needed them.

Had it been a stroke?   There had been plenty of villagers who experienced strokes and most knew what the symptoms were, Blinding pain in the head, weakness, and loss of consciousness. There had certainly been pain and he had passed out. But, he didn't feel any weaker on either side of his body. In fact, he felt perfectly healthy.

The lights behind his eyelids dimmed as the sun finally swept out of his window. Chance cautiously opened one eye and then the other. There was a brief flash of pain, more of a discomfort, as his eyes readjusted themselves.

Chance waited patiently for the world to come into focus.  It didn't.  It wasn't blurry, more like there were two of everything and sometimes they would merge and sometimes spin wildly a way.  It was almost as if each eye saw the same thing but couldn't agree on what that thing was currently doing.   

He looked at a tray that had been left in a precariously unstable position on the shelves that stored his clean clothing.  A strong wind blew through the open window.  In his eyes, the tray split.  One of the trays rocked slightly at the strong wind, the other tray crashed to the ground.  A brief moment later, the destroyed tray vanished and only the one still rocking on the shelves remained.

What the zet was that?  He thought to himself.  He closed his eyes, rubbed them and then looked again.  Still, the world around him frothed or perhaps buzzed as his eyes saw things happening differently before the twinned outcomes would slap back together and a new cycle began again.  This was happening to everything around him including the walls. they seemed to fall spontaneously before that vision disappeared and only a sturdy wall remained.

He caught movement out of the top of his view and looked up.  The beams from the room's rafters come crashing towards him.  Chance squawked and hurriedly drew himself into a fetal position.  when he looked out from under his hands covering his face, he saw the ceiling still supported by those beams.

There was a scuffing at the door and the knob began to turn.  They wanted to be quiet in case he was sleeping. 

"Come in," he said loudly.

The door opened and Chance's mother entered the room.  She was dressed in Thohallan traditional garb, a white tunic. typically linen and a pair of leather pants.  It was almost identical to what men wore, all Thohanllan did pretty much the same work.

There were some differences.  The women preferred a lower-cut blouse and usually wore a leather bodice.  The pants tended to be tighter, more form-fitting.

On more formal or special occasions. The women wore dresses like the one that Rhyannim had that night only a few months ago.

"I'm glad to see you awake, dear," his mother said, "thank sweet Malachor that he decided you had more to do for his glory.

"Thank you, mother," Chance replied. "Lord Malachor has indeed spared me." 

Mother set the tray she was carrying on the table by his bed. She moved to the tray sitting on the shelves and pushed it back from the edge.  In Chance's eyes, the secondary image collapsed for some reason.  Maybe it had something to do with how close it was to falling and Mother's moving had secured the tray and a warning would not be needed.  Perhaps that is what his eyes were seeing, warnings.

But that didn't explain everything.  There were still the flickers all around him.  The curtains in the window danced with their own apparitions. No danger in that.

"Brother Mica is coming by to check on you later," Mother said.

"There's no need for that," Chance said. "It was most likely a migraine. The widow Jennison has them and they often make her pass out from the pain.”

"Chance. You are not going to pretend that nothing is wrong.  We all know how much Rhyannin meant to you.  Suze Tennison's headaches began when her husband died.  I won't risk that happening to you and Brother Micha agrees." 

"Yes mother," Chance sighed and accepted that he would be poked and prodded both physically and spiritually.

"Good," she said, "that's good.  Close your eyes and rest." 

With that, she left and closed the door.

Chance closed his eyes and tried to drift off to sleep.  The problem was that he wasn't tired and his mind didn't want to shut down.  Instead, it wanted to explore the new phenomenon of his sight. It wanted to figure out the puzzle.

He opened his eyes and watched the room about him shift. Oddly, the ghost images seemed as real to him as the real image.  He found that if he focused enough, even the ghosts had their own noises that corresponded to their independent actions.

Chance's eyes fell on a broom leaning in a corner behind the door.  It was a non-descript broom, simple yet well-made. Its image pair had it both firmly leaning in the corner and falling to the ground with a solid snap of sound.

"I wonder," Chance muttered to himself.  A thought had come to him

Chance cleared his mind of everything but the shifting broom.  Slowly, he began to try to make the falling image more real.  It was tricky because the standing image kept intruding.  It was like trying to grapple a snake coated with grease.  But slowly the image of the fallen broom solidified in his mind's eye.

The broom fell with a sharp snap that startled Chance.  He realized that he hadn't truly believed something like that would happen.  He hadn't known what he expected to happen.  Maybe some way of refining the warning he thought he saw. He hadn't actually expected to move it.

No, he hadn't moved it.  It must have been something else.  The wind perhaps had blown it over.  Or a tremor that he hadn't felt that shook the floor.  Or some of the bristles suddenly breaking on one side.  There had to be a hundred, a thousand, other explanations for what happened.  

Chance got very little sleep that night. this time it wasn't his memories of Rhy that kept him awake. Instead, he had this shiny new talent to play with. He spent the night testing it, trying to find the limits of what he could do.

He couldn't find a limit. Some things might take more effort, but eventually, even those become absurdly easy.  He started out simply, picking up the broom where it had fallen.  The problem there was that none of the ghost images showed the broom upright again.  Instead, the broom lay there with no ghosts at all. As though there was less potential for the broom to stand up than it was to fall down. But, did that mean it was impossible for it to right itself?

The obvious answer was yes.  However, it was also improbable for it to fall over without touching it.  Perhaps he should forget about the word "impossible" for a while.

A thought occurred to him, what if he pictured himself lifting the broom into place? He wrinkled his brow and reached out with his hand.  And nothing, Chance felt absolutely nothing.  Not that he knew what to expect, he had never tried to move an inanimate stick with straw for bristles before.

But, he should have felt something, right?  Instead, he felt nothing. what was he missing? 

He thought back to the tipping of the broom. what had he done?  What had he felt? It seemed silly, all he remembered was looking at the two ghost images and focusing on the second one, where it fell.  He could do that here, but, again, there were no ghosts to select from.

He paused as that line of thought broke.

But what if I could create ghosts?  

Chance wondered to himself.  His heart began pounding in his chest in excitement. He took a few breaths to calm himself.  That excitement was interfering with his ability to focus.  

Chance began by isolating the broom in his mind.  Only the broom existed in his world. Slowly, he began imagining the broom returning to lean against the wall. The ghost images appeared only this time there weren't just two.  There were hundreds.  Chance was startled by the images and his concentration broke. The ghosts disappeared.

He should have been frustrated.  Instead, he felt giddy.  He could only touch the tip of what was possible.  The vast number of images represented all the ways the broom could stand up.  He had created the ghosts! 

He calmed down and focused on the broom again. He concentrated on lifting the broom and was prepared for the flood of images. The question now was which to choose. Chance decided that simpler was easier and selected the ghost.  The ghost began to solidify until it was more real than the real.

The broom stood up.

Chance sat there, stunned. He didn't bother asking what had happened.  He knew. He had looked at the broom and decided that it should stand up. 

No, that wasn't correct, he had sifted through the ghost images in his mind.  He had selected one of them that had shown the broom standing up.  And then what? 

It was difficult to nail down exactly what he had done with the selected image.  It was as though he simply decided that the ghost image was true and it became true. 

Chance was both thrilled and shocked.  He was thrilled that he had new, unexpected powers.  He was equally shocked at the implications this power had. Shock gave way to apprehension then fear.  What would Lord Malachor do if he knew chance had powers that no other human possessed? 

Closer to the present, what would Brother Micha say if he knew of Chance's power?  Most likely, the cleric would denounce Chance as a demon who sold his soul for a chance to rival Malachor himself.  If he was lucky, it would end with the denouncement and probable banishment.  If he were lucky.  

Much more likely. Chance would be tortured.  First to find his intermediate contact within the village who had bargained with the demon on Chance's behalf.  He would then drag the unfortunate villager that Chance would name under torture for a new round of torture.  The cycle would repeat until Micha was satisfied that the demon's network had been expunged.  

The second reason that Chance would be tortured is that, through pain and confession. Chance's soul could be purged of the crimes against Malachor.  After the torture, the broken body would be left alone in a dark, damp cell for monks in the monastery.  If Lord Malachor was satisfied with the soul's repentance, the body would heal and recover. The scars would be a constant reminder of both the price of sin and the unfailing mercy of Lord Malachor.

However, more likely than not, the body died.  No medical services were provided and only bread and water were provided.  Along with the damp darkness, festering wounds quickly turned gangrenous.  The subsequent death was interpreted as Lord Malachor summoning the sinner home for a personal account of the transgressions that had put the soul in trouble in the first place.

Chance broke out in a cold sweat. Brother Micha hadn't shown up that afternoon, probably due to some church business.  But, he would be by in the morning. Could Chance keep this secret from him?

****

This is probably a good place to explain what quantumancy is.  I'll keep it brief.  If you wish for more in depth explanations, there are tomes on the bookshelf behind my desk.

At its most base form, quantumancy is both easy and difficult to understand.  The first thing you have to do is to completely forget the word “impossible”.  Quite literally, nothing is impossible.  You could say it's impossible to be impossible.

Sorry, a little quantumancer joke there.

Every thing is possible, the question is how probable is the event you wish to enforce.  For example, it's entirely possible that this book will suddenly change into a bird and fly away.  Is it probable?  Of course not, don't be silly.  But, the point is that it is possible.

For example, it was far more probable that the broom was going to fall by itself.  It was less probable that the broom was going to stand up by itself.  That's why it was harder for me to pick it up than it was for me to knock it over.  Either was possible, just one was a more remote possibility than the others.

Simple, right?

But, back to my story.  I had a very real fear of Brother Mica quite literally torturing me for something that had been done with me.  What that was, we'll talk about later.  The real question is.  What did I do?