---
layout: chapter
title: "Chapter "
world: iolanu
book: by-chance
order: 4  
---

What did I do?  I ran away, of course.  I had no desire to be a visitor to Brother Micha's torture chamber. 

At that time, running away from home was a far more dangerous endeavor than it is today.  This was at the height of the First Age.  The Second Age was still thousands of years in the future.  None of the city-states you know now existed.  Some city-states that you've never heard of existed.  There was nothing once you left your village.  It was just before Malachor really started playing with his favorite people, the Thohalla.  First, the conquerors then the conquered, then the cycle would repeat itself. 

I liked the life of a hermit. most of the time I studied and practiced with my new gift.  Within a few years, I could easily mend things like tools and clothing.  I could hunt with it, making the animal's heart stop.  I've never enjoyed killing, but I had to eat and I couldn't past make food suddenly appear.  More specifically, I could simply have made food appear from nothing, but that kind of quantumancy is far more difficult than just hunting the game and cooking it the old-fashioned way.  It was far easier and far more productive.

But my favorite trick is one that I stumbled on, quite literally.  It came at great personal pain and desperation. But, without it, I would, not be here today

****

Chance paused to squat and sit on his haunches.  He was breathing hard, a combination of the hike, the altitude, and the heavy backpack strapped to his shoulders.  But the view was spectacular.  He was lust below the snow line and his breath misted as he exhaled.  A valley stretched out below him, running almost perfectly straight.  Only a few small bends were visible where the river flowed quickly from the large rapids and waterfalls at its head.  Chance admired the view.  In the almost twenty years of his self-imposed exile, he had yet to be unmoved by what Malachor had created.

At least Chance thought it was twenty years.  Time refused to be remembered here.  He could count the seasons, but that was unreliable in some of the places he stayed.  He only stayed in one spot for a few seasons, a year at the most.  He kept moving, though he really didn't know why.  Perhaps it was simply the fact that the life of a lone nomad was the best fit for someone like him.

A strong gust of wind buffeted him and Chance absently shifted his weight to keep from being blown over.  However, as he did, the ground beneath his right foot gave way past enough to signal his brain a panic warning to get him to compensate.  Chance's muscles reacted to his inner ear and shifted again.  Unfortunately, the weight shift was unneeded.  The slip of his right foot was minute and quickly stopped.  The most minute weight shift unbalanced him and yelped as the heavy backpack shifted on his back and pulled Chance off his feet and down the side of the ridge. 

In a strange twist of irony, it was Chance's backpack that saved his life.  He fell almost two hundred feet before landing on his back with the pack as something of a cushion.  His head was caught by the bedroll that he had tied to the top of the pack.  The impact still parred his brain, he probably had a concussion.  But the bedroll kept his head from snapping his neck.

His legs, however, weren't so lucky. He had felt his spine snap as his lower body wasn't protected by the relative cushion of the pack.  Instead, the pack's support of Chance's lower back gave just enough leverage to the legs and pelvis to snap it cleanly about two inches above his pelvis.  His legs were limp and unresponsive.  He felt a searing pain in his lower back and then absolutely nothing.

Chance was still in a daze while his mind recorded these facts. He felt the pain but couldn't associate it with his own body.  Instead, he found it hilarious to be stuck on his back, lying on his backpack like a turtle that had been flipped onto his back and could only flail about with his arms.

Slowly his wits returned and the pain became more personal.  Only the gradual increase in pain and the observations he had made when he was stunned kept him from panic.  As it was he could hear gibbering terror in the back corner of his mind trying to push its way forward.  Chance almost welcomed it.

The first thing he needed to do was to get off this backpack.  Not only did he need supplies, but the angle on his lower back was excruciating.  Perhaps being on a flat surface would at least take the edge off. He fumbled with the shoulder straps but getting the right leverage to slip his arms out was difficult.  He hadn't realized just how much one needed their lower body until it was on the other side of a broken spine.

He finally managed to free his arms and paused to consider his options.  His first option was to try to push the backpack out from beneath him. He would push the pack up towards his head while keeping his body still. 

Unfortunately, that proved to be both painful and ineffective.  He simply didn't have the leverage to take his weight off the pack.  To do that meant putting pressure on his shattered spine.  Chance had nearly passed out from the pain.  However, what he did find out was that he could, just barely, generate enough leverage to semi-roll himself by pushing against the ground with one hand and tugging on the pack with the other.  He had tested it and it seemed workable and the pack had slid a little when he tugged.  It was still painful, but not as painful as trying to set up enough to pull it over his head.

Chance steeled himself against the pain he knew was coming.  He counted to three aloud.  When he reached three, he leveraged himself to one side and yanked as hard as he could.  There was one, brief satisfying moment as the pack jerked free.  Then the pain hit and Chance passed out again.

Consciousness returned as abruptly as it had left.  He still hurt, but compared to laying on the pack, laying on the level ground was a distinct improvement.

The sun was beginning to move below the mountains casting evening shadows upon where Chance lay. He had been out for hours.  He had barely enough time to prepare for the coming night.

But what was the point?  

He couldn't escape that one question.  The broken back was a death sentence.  He could neither hunt nor gather.  His chance of building a fire was little better and he couldn't get the firewood to keep it burning.  And, on top of all that, the predators of the night would make quick work of a crippled man.  One way or the other, Chance was an easy meal for whatever decided to come looking.

There was no second question because Chance already knew the answer.  He wasn't going to allow himself to starve.  If he had to choose between starvation and suicide, there really wasn't a choice.  He would choose the easier way out.  Cold, hard logic besieged the very real self-preservation instinct that all men and creatures possess.  It didn't assault the proverbial fortress so much as wait outside the walls while the instinct starved itself out.

Chance really didn't want to die.  Despite the self-imposed exile, he had learned to love the open ranges and forests of the wild.  He had so much more to see.  He was procrastinating.  He didn't want to do this and the gibbering terror in the back of his mind kept tugging at its restraints.  Taking a deep breath, Chance calmed himself.  At least it would be quick.  All he had to do was focus on his heart, pick a possibility that it had stopped beating and realize it.  After that, nature would do whatever it wanted to do to his body.

Chance closed his eyes. There really wasn't anything to see, his heart was deep in his chest.  But, he had learned that this was something that could be done by feel alone.  There it was, his beating heart.  It felt different from any other animal that Chance had killed.  Perhaps it was the physical feedback in response to his probing.  Chance could feel each individual muscle strand of the heart.  He could feel the nerve impulses as they moved along the nerves.

That's interesting Chance thought to himself and an idea came to him.

He changed the focus of his probe to his lower back.  He could feel the break and the severed nerves.  Below that Chance's probe could find nothing wrong with his legs. 

What if I could repair this?

A glowing ray of hope began to shine before Chance could quash it.  He couldn't get too excited, after all, this would probably and he could very well botch it and end up worse than before.

You were about to kill yourself. 

And it was true, what did he have to lose? If he botched it, he could always stop his heart then just as well as now.  He would have more reason and motivation.

He let his senses flow around the break, both bones and nerves.  There were muscles around there that had been torn, but Chance was far more concerned about the bone and nerves.  He was pleasantly surprised to discover that none of the vertebrae seemed to be broken.  His back had been broken between the vertebrae and they were simply out of alignment.

Should he go slowly on quickly to just get it over with?  Either way was going to be painful, but Chance elected to take it slowly.  While it would be painful longer, he couldn't guarantee that he wouldn't pass out from the sudden pain of a quick jolt.  And if he passed out, he wouldn't be able to fix any damage such a move might cause.  He could very well bleed out before he could wake up.  

First, Chance turned his pack around to where he kept his canteen.  He was relieved to find it had survived the fall and was still full of water.  Having some water to drink during this would certainly help.  He took a long drink, not bothering to be frugal with his water like he usually did.  After taking a long drink he set the mate. skin aside and inhaled deeply.  The extra oxygen helped settled his mind and he was able to force the pain into a throbbing corner of his mind.

Chance turned his attention back to the injury.  To his eyes, the bone was almost fluid on waves of possibility.  They weren't sequential, they occurred simultaneously.  It was both confusing and nauseating.  The image of his spine immediately straight was very, very tempting.  However, he resisted the urge.  It was still new territory and he didn't want to go screwing around.  Instead, he took incremented steps, bit by bit.

He was surprised to feel detached from the pain.  It was still there, screaming away in the corner of his mind that he had left it. It screamed louder as Chance felt his spine move and mend itself.  It took him less time than he thought it would to get the pieces back in place. 

It was time for the tricky part.  He turned his attention to the nerves.  Mending the spinal cord was actually easier than Chance thought it would be.  It was certainly easier than the bones. with the vertebrae in place, all he needed was to pick the outcomes which made them whole.  He had worried about attaching the correct nerves together. He didn't need to worry, the nerves seemed to have an affinity to regain the correct strand.  Nerve by nerve, feeling returned to his legs and feet.

Repairing the torn muscles in his back was almost trivial.  He flew through then, repairing with little thought and seemingly without effort.  The pain ebbed until only an ache remained.  Chance didn't want to continue making changes.  The pain was akin to twisting your back hauling nets on his father's boat.  He had worked through much worse.

xxxx

To those that have been reading, you've probably deduced why I couldn't have done exactly that.  The human body is far too fragile, far too complex to grasp as one possibility.  Even a gifted quantumancer like me can only hold so many threads together at a time.  If I had misplaced a strand of fate and had passed out from the pain, I would have probably been too dead by the time I woke up to realize it, let alone fix it.

How about you leave this to the experts and stop the questions?  

Ok, Alyz said that was rude.  

Sorry.

Stop Alyz!  I said I was sorry. 

After I had repaired my spine, I lay still, not trusting my handiwork.  I guess I was gathering the courage to stand.  What if I had missed something?  What if I had reassembled things the wrong way?  What if moving my big toe instead meant an erection? 

I had gained a new appreciation for my gift.  If I could repair catastrophic damage, what else could I do?  Could I stop my body from aging?  Could I literally imagine my body not deteriorating with age and keep myself young?

At first, I could only halt my aging in short spans.  Doing it in longer spans required training myself to be truly multitasking.  Luckily, my trick of putting my hands in automatic mode while mending nets proved to be handy.  That still left the nights when I would sleep.  I would age in those hours.  But, after a few years of virtually no sleep, I learned to maintain it while I slept. 

Today, I look back and cringe in horror at the risks that I took to get where I am.  Back then, I had no idea how close I came to killing myself on numerous occasions.  But, then again, if I had known, and have been rightfully scared.  I wouldn't be immortal. 