---
layout: chapter
title: "Chapter 5"
world: iolanu
book: by-chance
order: 5  
---

I've mentioned Malachor before, but I haven't told you who he is.  Simply, he is our god.  Or should I say, was our god.  It's confusing.

In our pantheon, there are three main gods, or deities, Malachor, Iota, and Omega.  Those probably aren't their real names, but we really just need labels, and some idiot historian came up with these.  Don't blame me.

Also, don't get hung up on the genders.  If you don't like the fact that I refer to Omega as a “he”, change it to a “she” when you read it.  I'm just using historical references to skip the whole unknowable essence complications that any theological discussion tends to get bogged down in.

The one we call Omega is the “father” god, for the lack of a better term.  He has many deific children, of which Iota and Malachor are merely two of them.

Malachor is said to be immature, willfully spiteful.  Omega had forbidden Malachor from creating his own world because the old man knew what a hateful ass that Malachor was.  Proving he was indeed and hateful ass, Malachor created our world behind Omega's back, so to speak.

The problem is that Omega was quite aware of what Malachor had done.  One of the religious discussions that persisted is why Omega simply didn't destroy what Malachor had illegally built.  However, while Malachor is something of a disappointment, Omega is far more wise.  Omega values life and the souls that life creates.  It wasn't our fault to be created, thus Omega let it be.  Omega tried to use our world as a training tool to teach Malachor responsibility and growth.  It failed.

To return to my story, about five hundred years after I had fixed my back, I decided to check on how things were going in the world.  It was a mix of curiosity and boredom.  I was happy in my wilderness life, but there were few opportunities to keep up with current events. By this time, I had lost track of where my village was, your feet can take you quite a distance in five hundred and twenty years.  It took me three years to find a small town on the Sea of Storms.  There weren't a lot of towns, or people at that time and I wasn't in that much of a hurry.

****

Chance felt decidedly awkward setting in an actual chair, at an actual table in an actual inn.  There had been some humorous moments when Chance had walked in and tried to barter dinner for some pelts.  The innkeeper had directed him to a trader down the street to sell the pelts for money, with that, Chance could return and enjoy the meal.

The trader's shop had been easy to find, the town wasn't that large.  The inside was comforting.  It wasn't dirty or cluttered, nor was it tediously neat and tidy.  It was that state of rustic where a goodly amount of goods had been stacked in aisles that seemed to hug the shopper rather than smoother them.

The owner stood behind the counter, speaking to another customer.  The client nodded thanks and handed the owner something Chance couldn't see before they gathered their items and headed for the door.  The owner then waved Chance over.

"Good day to you, sir,” the man said, "what can I do for you?" 

"I've got some pelts to sell, if you are interested," Chance said.

"I'm always interested in pelts, assuming they are in good condition." 

Chance set his pack on the ground.  Then he knelt to open the main compartment.  He never squatted anymore.   Having your spine snapped because you were off-balanced tended to dissuade one from being cavalier about their balance and distribution of weight.  The pelts were at the top, he had packed last night with barter in mind for goods, not coin.  Chance pulled them out and set the furs on the counter.

The shopkeeper whistled in appreciation.  "These are some fine furs," he said and flipped through them.

"I won't have to prepare these, which is good.  I can sell them at price, give you more, and still be able to make a profit." 

The shopkeeper gave a number, presumably what he was willing to offer.  Chance took the number added about 25% and countered.  It was an old haggling trick and, since Chance had no clue what the value of the coins that they were haggling over,   He was glad to let the other man set the starting point and they could work from there.

The shopkeeper seemed to enjoy himself and about fifteen minutes later, Chance left the shop with a price close to the middle of their starting asking figures.

The innkeeper looked up as Chance returned.

"Welcome back!" he said and tucked the towel in his hands into a loop on his apron."  I take it the deal went well?"

Chance nodded and said what they had agreed on.  The barkeep whistled and said,

"Those must have been some mighty fine pelts.

"They were," Chance said, "I take it that it's a fair price?"

"More than fair, to be honest.  I assume that you dickered with him?

Chance nodded.

"That explains some of it.  That man loves to haggle.  Word is that he only opened that store of his as an excuse to haggle.  Probably why you got such a good price, that and an incentive to do repeat business with him”

Chance nodded. "How much for a meal and a room?”  He held the coins out.

The innkeeper reached over and removed a couple of coins, setting them on the counter.  It seemed fair enough.

Which is how he found himself drowsing in this chair staring into a crackling fire. The meal had been a very delicious stew and a loaf of bread.  Chance hadn't had bread in centuries, nor where to grind the flour or build an oven.  He had lived what amounted to a hunter-gatherer lifestyle and even the mead in his cup was something he had long gone without. 

The opening door brought Chance back from his nap.  The air wasn't frigid, but there were hints of fall.

"Welcome!" the innkeeper called out to the new arrival.  The man wore a simple tune and pants.  His hands were heavily calloused and his posture was slightly hunched as though his work required him to work hunched over while he attended to fine details.

"The usual?" The innkeeper asked.

"If you please," the man nodded and clopped to the bar, taking one of the empty stools.

"Any news on your way here?" the innkeeper set a tankard and bowl in front of the man.

"The Thohalla are acting the fools again." the man paused to take a bite and Chance could only stare at the mention of his people. 

"What are they up to now?" the innkeeper sounded exasperated.

"Mostly conquering up and down the coast." The man said.

"Weren't they just slaves?" 

The new man nodded and paused to eat a lute.

"About five years ago they rose up against the Melonans who conquered them in my great-grandfather's day.  That's been what, almost two hundred years ago?" 

"About that," the innkeeper said, "my own grandfather was a boy."  

Chance stood, grabbed his dirty dishes, and took them to the counter.

"I couldn't help but hear you talking about the Thohalla." 

"Aye, and thanks," The innkeeper tipped Chance's dirty glass in his direction before placing it in a bucket behind the bar.

"If what he says is true," the innkeeper nodded at the other man, “then the Thohalla are starting what seems to be a cycle. they conquer everything they get their hands on, sometimes they get rather brutal about it.  A few centuries later somebody comes along, commits a bunch of atrocities, and enslaves them."

"And, in a couple of centuries," Chance finished, “they rise up again, massacre their slavers and repeat." 

"Bingo," The innkeeper picked up a fresh tankard, tipped it, and winked.  He then turned to the giant keg behind him and set a foaming tankard in front of him.

"How much?"  Chance asked and reached into his pocket for the coins 

"My treat," the innkeeper said.  "For bringing the dishes here instead of me going out there to fetch them myself.”

"Thanks," Chance took a long drink.  "Which way are the Thohalla heading?' 

"Why?" The man squinted, face tinged with suspicion.  “Going to go looking for them?"

"No sir, I want to know so I can go the opposite direction."

"Smart man," he belched. "they just tore apart Melona on the north shore of the Sea of Storms.  Last I heard, they were moving west. As long as you stay on the east shore, you'll be safe.”

Chance thanked the man and asked The innkeeper for directions to his room.  The innkeeper handed Chance his room key and wished him good night.

Chance barely heard, his mind was else­where.  What was he going to do?  The thought kept bouncing around in his mind, what was he going to do?  He hadn't seen any of his people in over two thousand years.  What family bond did he owe them?

Damn it, he cursed.  Why had that man brought up the Thohalla in the first place?

Chance reached his room and locked the door behind him.  He set his pack next to the door and sat to remove his boots.  The bed looked comfortable, perhaps too comfortable.  He would try it.  If it proved too soft, there was always the floor.

He doused the candle and the room faded to black, broken by the stars from outside his window.  The worries over the comfort of the mattress became moot.  He was fast asleep in moments.

****

A particularly astute question here should be how I was able to flawlessly communicate with complete strangers after almost two thousand years in the wild?

Congratulations!  Award yourself some arbitrary number of points for being delightfully astute.

The answer is, I didn't.  Much of those first few hours resembled a bad pinyin as I relearned how to speak again

Luckily, The languages of that time were similar enough. Not a lot of time after the creation for diaspora to generate new languages.  There were strange dialects, but the words were similar.

Even then the conversations didn't go nearly that smoothly.  I cleaned it up for three reasons.

One, I hate stereotypes.  If I were to faithfully recreate, I would be doing those men a gross disservice.  They were far from the ignorant rustics.  They weren't especially cultured, but worth more than apes trying to talk to a monkey. 

Second, I wanted to make this easily readable.  Realism has its place, but slavish dedication can intercept the flow of a story.  So, I'm writing this with the understanding that you, the reader, will grasp that thousands of years in a tale would mean things change, some changes you wouldn't understand.  I'd rather you understand why I am who I am than try to wow you with my near-perfect recall. 

The final reason that I'm writing this in legible dialogue is to avoid looking like an idiot. I have almost ten thousand years of reputation to consider.   The last thing I need is the image of an innkeeper using exaggerated gestures and really small words for me to take my dead animal skins to a merchant to get some real money to pay for room on food.

The important thing to understand is that the basic content of the conversation is there, including the free ale.