---
layout: chapter
title: "Chapter 6"
world: iolanu
book: by-chance
order: 6  
---

Even to this day, I don't know why I followed the Thoallans.  It could have been a sense of loyalty to Malachor.  Perhaps it was a hero complex thinking that I could save my people from a god.  Maybe it was just this sense of loneliness from being separated from familiar people for so long,

But, if I'm going to be honest, I think the best explanation was simply a very dark,  very intense curiosity about how Malachor was going to abuse his children this time.  It was like seeing a home on fire.  You could easily tell that it's on fire and know enough to go on about your business.  However, how many times have you stopped at a burning building just to watch for any drama, any entertainment that may come from the destruction of other people's lives?

Don't be judgemental and don't lie to yourself.  It's human nature to want to watch another human, or living being, being hurt.  Even our sense of humor depends on something unfortunate happening to somebody else.  Think about it.  Consider a joke you tell about three people of various groups.  At least one of them is the butt of the joke because they are inherently impaired or inconvenienced in some manner.

That's why elves have the stereotype of being a race lacking any sense of humor.  To be clear, I've known many elves in my millennia of life.  They don't derive their enjoyment from the pain of others.  If you want to see an elf laugh, create something.  They revel in the act of creation.

Regardless of my motivations, I left the inn in that nowhere village as early in the next morning as I could see enough of the road to not trip on unseen obstacles.  I knew roughly where they were going, up the coast and near the desert that we now call Portage.  I didn't know if they were going to cross that massive desert or if they were going to skirt around the eastern edge and continue north.  I prayed they would go north, but I knew my god. 

I made sure to pack plenty of water.  I never caught up to them.  My heart was in my feet as I stood on the edge of the Portage Desert.  I couldn't see my people, but the destroyed sand dunes, caused by the passage of thousands of feet, were clear to see.   I had some hope that the Thoholla had prepared for this trek until I discovered the first bodies.

For those of you who are making the assumption that I ran across victims of dehydration.  That is a natural conclusion since I mentioned the Portage Desert. That would be only partly accurate. The desert is massive, but it stretches across an isthmus.  There is water on both the north and south shores.  The problem is that the water is saltwater. 

I refuse to believe that the lack of preparation was an oversight.  That may be my innate hatred of my god framing every little action in the most negative light possible.  Yet, I find it difficult to think that a being powerful enough, capable enough, to create humans couldn't be aware of something as basic as taking freaking water into a freaking desert.

My personal feelings aside, the loss of more than half of those who followed into the desert counts as a disaster by any sane person's measurement.  Even the insane would have paled.

Malachor, however, turned that nightmare into a religious observance.  It was called, simply, The Crossing.  It was a week-long mortification.  No food is allowed for the week and only a drink of water because the human body literally can't survive a week without water.   To make it even more hellish, Malachor required the observance to be ended by drinking a large cup of saltwater, "to remember those who drank from the sea when faith in their god had flagged”.

XXXX

"This is ghastly,” Chance muttered as he glared at the cup in his hand. 

It wasn't the cup itself, which drew the sharp sense of disgust.  It was actually a very attractive design from a local Thoholla artist. 

It was the liquid inside the Cup which was objectionable. It had a distinctly bring scent that made Chance's stomach roil. Even after five hundred years of observing the final toast of the Crossing, Chance still grimaced at the thought of intentionally drinking salt water.  Not simply a bit of salt, a few grains in a large glass.  The Crossing required roughly ocean salinity in the final toast.  Unfortunately, that final toast could be fatal. 

A week of no food and minimal water left a body weak and dehydrated.  A kidney stone was almost a surety.  A fatal stone was not unknown or uncommon.  Dying because your kidneys shut down on something had burst was a horrific way to die.